Docs/build pipeline (#5184)
pachyderm/pachyderm: doc/docs/master/how-tos/developer-workflow/build-pipelines.md

# Build Pipelines

A build pipeline is a useful feature when iterating on the code in your pipeline. They allow you to bypass the Docker build process and submit your code directly to the pipeline. In essence, build pipelines automate Steps 2-4 of the [pipeline workflow](working-with-pipelines.md). A diagram of the build pipeline process is shown below.

![Developer workflow](../../assets/images/d_steps_build_pipeline.svg)

!!! note

>       Build pipelines are not currently supported in Pachyderm Hub.

Reviewer: You can nix this note, it will be fixed shortly by #5193

> !!! note
>       Build pipelines are not currently supported in Pachyderm Hub.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Functionally, the build pipeline relies on a base Docker image that remains unchanged during the development process. Any code written for the pipeline is copied into this container, installs requirements and updates the code in the pipeline before running it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functionally, a build pipeline relies on a base Docker image that remains unchanged during the development process. Code and build assets are stored in Pachyderm itself, and copied into the pipeline pod when it executes.
```

> Using this feature requires a modification of the pipeline spec's `transform` object with options for the following fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable this feature, add a `build` object to the pipeline spec's `transform` object, with the following fields:
```

- `path`: An optional string specifying where the source code is relative to the pipeline spec path (or the cwd if the pipeline is fed into `pachctl` via stdin.)
- `language`: An optional string specifying what language builder to use (see below.) Only works with official builders. If unspecified, `image` will be used instead.
- `image`: An optional string specifying what builder image to use, if a non-official builder is desired. If unspecified, the `transform` object's `image` will be used instead.

Below is a Python example of a build pipline.

```json
{
  "pipeline": {
    "name": "map"
  },
  "description": "A pipeline that tokenizes scraped pages and appends counts of words to corresponding files.",
  "transform": {
    "build": {
      "language": "python",
      "path": "./source"
    }
  },
  "input": {
    "pfs": {
      "repo": "scraper",
      "glob": "/*"
    }
  }
}
```

A build pipeline can be submitted the same way as any other pipeline, for example:

```bash
pachctl update pipeline -f <pipeline name>
```

## How it works

When submitted, the following actions occur:

> 1. All files (code, etc.) are copied from the build path to a PFS repository, `<pipeline name>_build`, which we can think of as the source code repository. In the case above, everything in `./source` would be copied to to the PFS `<pipeline name>_build` repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. All files (code, etc.) are copied from the build path to a PFS repository, `<pipeline name>_build`, which we can think of as the source code repository. In the case above, everything in `./source` would be copied to to the PFS `map_build` repository.
```

> 1. A pipeline called `<pipeline name>_build` starts, reading reading files from the `<pipeline name>_build` repo and runs the `build.sh` script to pull dependencies and compile any requirements from the source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A pipeline that uses the same repo but a different branch starts, reading the source code and creating build assets (i.e. pulling in dependencies and/or compiling) by running a `build.sh` script.
```

1. The running pipeline, `<pipeline name>`, is updated (or created if it doesn't already exist) with the the new source files and built assets.

!!! note

>       You can optionally specify a `.pachignore` file, which uses [ohmyglob](https://github.com/pachyderm/ohmyglob) entries to prevent certain files from getting pushed to this repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      You can optionally specify a `.pachignore` file in the source root directory, which uses [ohmyglob](https://github.com/pachyderm/ohmyglob) entries to prevent certain files from getting pushed to this repo.
```

The updated pipeline contains the following PFS repos mapped in as inputs:

> 1. `/pfs/source` - source code that is required for running the pipeline. There are language-specific requirements on the structure of this source code mentioned in the [Python Builder](#python-builder) section.

Reviewer: The second sentence is confusing in the context of non-python builders.

```suggestion
1. `/pfs/source` - source code that is required for running the pipeline.
```

1. `/pfs/build` - any artifacts resulting from the build process.

> 1. `/pfs/<input(s)>` - any inputs specified in the pipeline specification.

Reviewer: nit: just sounds a little less redundant

```suggestion
1. `/pfs/<input(s)>` - any inputs specified in the pipeline spec.
```

## Builders

> The builder is responsible for determining what Docker image is used for the base image and what steps to run during the pipeline build and deployment. If a builder has a standard implementation (currently `python` and `go`), then only the `transform.build.language` needs to be set, as it has impelmentations for `build.sh` and `run.sh`. The order of preference is:

Reviewer: I'm not sure how to rephrase this, but it's a little confusing atm, because the builder itself isn't responsible for that -- rather, the pipeline spec is.

Author: Good catch, are you okay with: 
"The builder interprets the pipeline spec to determine what Docker image to use as the base image and what steps to run for the build and deployment."

1. `transform.build.language`
1. `transform.build.image`
1. `transform.image`

> If `transform.buil.language` is not specified, then the build pipeline is non-standard and uses the `transform.build.image` container (and subsequently the `transform.build` if `transform.build.image` is not provided). In a non-standard implementation, the convention is to provide `build.sh` and `run.sh` scripts to fulfill the build pipeline requirements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `transform.build.language` is not specified, then the build pipeline is non-standard and uses the `transform.build.image` container (and subsequently the `transform.build` if `transform.build.image` is not provided). In a non-standard implementation, the convention is to provide `build.sh` and `run.sh` scripts to fulfill the build pipeline requirements. 
```

Also, non-standard doesn't sound quite right, maybe they should be called unofficial builders?

Similarly, a build pipeline by default will run `sh /pfs/build/run.sh` by default. If a `transform.cmd` is specified, it will take precedence over `run.sh`.

### Python Builder

> The Python builder requires a file structure similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Python builder relies on a file structure similar to the following:
```

```tree
./map
├── source
│   ├── requirements.txt
│   ├── ...
│   └── main.py
└── build-pipeline.json
```
There must exist a `main.py` which acts as the entrypoint for the pipeline. Optionally, a `requirements.txt` can be used to specify pip packages that will be installed during the build process. Other supporting files in the directory will also be copied and available in the pipeline if they are not excluded by the `.pachignore`.

> The `build.sh` and `run.sh` files are optional, as the Python Builder already contains these scripts. However, if the base image is modified, they must be provided.

Reviewer: This is not true, user-specified `build.sh` and `run.sh` do not work

Author: It's not true if they're using the `language=python`, but isn't it true if you modify the base image to be something other than the standard Python Builder?

Author: (i.e. the new base image wouldn't have a `build.sh` or `run.sh`)

Reviewer: Yes that's correct, but pipeline builder images are separate from the user code, and would be stored in separate locations

### Go Builder

The Go Builder follows the same format as the [Python Builder](#python-builder). There must be a main source file in the source root that imports and invokes the intended code.

### Creating a Builder

For languages other than Python and Go, or customizations to the official builders, users can author their own builders. Builders are somewhat similar to buildpacks in design, and follow a convention over configuration approach. A builder needs 3 things:

- A Dockerfile to bake the image specified in the build pipeline spec.
- A `build.sh` in the image workdir, which acts as the entry-point for the build pipeline.
- A `run.sh`, injected into `/pfs/out` via `build.sh`. This will act as the entry-point for the executing pipeline. By convention, `run.sh` should take an arbitrary number of arguments and forward them to whatever executes the actual user code.

The build file structure would have the following format: 
```tree
./project
├── source
│   ├── requirements.txt
│   ├── main.py
│   ├── build.sh
│   └── run.sh
└── build-pipeline.json

> ```

Reviewer: This isn't right, see the official builders in `etc/pipeline-build` for guiding examples. In particular, there's no pipeline spec, `main.py` or `requirements.txt` in either of them.

Author: I think I worded it poorly here. This is supposed to be the local project structure where they are developing, i.e. the pipeline they are developing, not the create their own builder. So they would have to have a pipeline spec.

Author: I'll look at it and try to clarify.

# Build Pipelines

> A build pipeline is a useful feature when iterating on the code in your pipeline. They allow you to bypass the Docker build process and submit your code directly to the pipeline. In essence, build pipelines automate Steps 2-4 of the [pipeline workflow](working-with-pipelines.md). A diagram of the build pipeline process is shown below.

Reviewer 2: In some ways it removes the need for many of those steps.

"In essence, build pipelines automate or remove the need for Steps 2-? of the [pipeline workflow](working-with-pipelines.md)"

Author: What do you think about this? 
```suggestion
A build pipeline is a useful feature when iterating on the code in your pipeline. In essence, build pipelines automate or remove the need for Steps 2-4 of the [pipeline workflow](working-with-pipelines.md). They allow you to bypass the Docker build process and submit your code directly to the pipeline. A diagram of the build pipeline process is shown below.
```

The updated pipeline contains the following PFS repos mapped in as inputs:

1. `/pfs/source` - source code that is required for running the pipeline.

1. `/pfs/build` - any artifacts resulting from the build process.

1. `/pfs/<input(s)>` - any inputs specified in the pipeline spec.

## Builders

The builder interprets the pipeline spec to determine:

* A Docker image to use as the base image.
* Steps to run for the build.
* Step to run upon deployment.
  
The `transform.build.language` field is solely required to use an official builder (currently `python` or `go`), which already have impelmentations for `build.sh` and `run.sh`.

### Python Builder

The Python builder relies on a file structure similar to the following:

```tree
./map
├── source
│   ├── requirements.txt
│   ├── ...
│   └── main.py
```
There must exist a `main.py` which acts as the entrypoint for the pipeline. Optionally, a `requirements.txt` can be used to specify pip packages that will be installed during the build process. Other supporting files in the directory will also be copied and available in the pipeline if they are not excluded by the `.pachignore`.

> The `build.sh` and `run.sh` files are optional, as the Python Builder already contains these scripts. However, if the base image is modified, they must be provided.

Reviewer: This line still needs to be removed

> The `build.sh` and `run.sh` files are optional, as the Python Builder already contains these scripts. However, if the base image is modified, they must be provided.

Reviewer: If I were reading this, I would still assume that it means I can optionally specify a ` build.sh` or `run.sh` in the `map/source` directory

Author: Ah you're right. Looks like I didn't commit that change. 

```suggestion
```
